---
layout: post
title:  "the presidential lecture of the arts and sciences"
date:   2014-11-02 03:14:15
categories: lecture
about: causation
---

 &nbsp;&nbsp; “Imagine, if you will, that causation is not so directional as we suppose.
That cause does not, as surely you firmly believe, necessarily precede effect;
that cause can rather bear a posterior relation to effect. This sounds to you,
I know, like science fiction; and if it is not fiction, it sounds at least
like an obscure discovery of science, that is, hard science, a matter that
would surely be understood only by university quantum physicists fully
immersed in what many laypeople see as quasi-mystical mathematical esoterica.
This is, in fact, a discovery of science; more specifically, it is an idea now
being posited by linguistics. This science is still mostly unfamiliar to the
layperson, but the basic outline of the theory, as it has been laid out by
linguists, is easily understood: simply put, linguists are now beginning to be
able to demonstrate, conclusively, that given enough time, all languages will
converge into a common ancestor language. There is, of course, an obvious
objection here: that this convergence is not a matter of ‘inverse causation’
(to borrow the term one researcher has chosen to describe the phenomenon), but
rather of cultural contact, borrowing, and, thus, normal causation; and
surely, it is hard to imagine that such convergence would not be a social
phenomenon. Those of you with some knowledge of linguistics will be quick to
point out that, while English is a Germanic language, at present, over half of
the English lexicon is of Latin or French origin. Yet, to even begin to
assemble evidence in favor of this counterpoint would be to judge far too
quickly. You see, this is not simply a matter of vocabular convergence between
languages following social contact between distinct linguistic groups; it goes
far, far beyond that. It is a matter of syntactic and grammatical convergence
as well, and it has *absolutely nothing to do with contact between cultures.*
Using written, historical evidence, along with linguistic models of ancestor
languages, linguists have now demonstrated that these three types of
convergence began long before the major world cultures made contact with one
another. And so we know now that what some may see as the descent of modern
languages from the complex grammatical structures of Proto-Indo-European is
not a “descent” at all, at least not in the sense of any of the languages
distancing themselves from their ancestor; and by the same token, the
Sino-Tibetan languages have not fallen from their classical forms, but have
instead progressed toward their root language, a simpler, more logical
ancestor. This original language, which one linguist has termed ‘a universal
algebra of thought,’ can only be sketched out in very broad strokes at this
point, and most linguists think its ascendance still lies some 3000 years
hence. I want to stress, though, that the point about logicality and
universality is not a simplification or lazy generalization on my part.
Linguistic psychologists have, at the same time that this historical research
was taking place, demonstrated using computational models in conjunction with
field research (comparing the cognitive ability of twins who have been brought
up speaking temporally-distant related languages, which, in this case, are
Latin and French) that newer languages, the so-called ‘descendent’ languages,
allow speakers to process information far more efficiently – and this is
reflected not only in IQ tests and other measures of reasoning ability, but
also in the amount of calories each speaker burned while competing the various
linguistic tasks they were charged with. So, while we cannot be sure what
symbols this so-called ‘universal algebra’ will utilize, we can be sure of
both its universality and its algebrality.

 &nbsp;&nbsp; "Now, back to my original point: causality. What does this mean for
rationality, for reality? At this point, the implications are extremely
unclear, but the evidence for inverse causation lies before us in full
perspicuity. Language, it now seems, has not been evolving over time; or
rather, it has been evolving over time, only the direction of ‘over time’ is
the opposite of what we usually mean when using that phrase. So what are the
wider implications of this? This question is still, in many ways, wide open,
but other researchers have already begun to apply it to their work. For
instance, a group of physicists at Stanford have begun to apply models of
inverse causality to the idea of Big Crunch (which is itself a sort of
inverse of the Big Bang), and even at this preliminary stage, the work has
proved remarkably fruitful. Perhaps more striking, yet at this point far
more tentative, is the work one Harvard historian is doing regarding the
possible influence of a future nuclear war on present and past social ills.
Work exploring the implications of this new discovery is just beginning, but
it already shows amazing promise of possibly altering our worldview quite
dramatically.”
