---
layout: post
title:  "overheard in a coffeehouse"
date:   2014-10-14 03:14:15
categories: overheard
about: "the future"
---


 &nbsp;&nbsp;“…but, I mean, nothing that we have now will compare to what we’ll have in 20
  or 30 years. And I’m not just talking about computers and smartphones and the
  things that will replace smartphones – it’s gonna go so much deeper than that.
  Like TV. Like, right now, neuroscientists can already see what parts of the
  brain are being stimulated by different kinds of activity. But in 30 years?
  They’ll be able to map the individual neurons – literally, be able to map a
  correspondence between individual neurons firing, the feelings and cognitions
  they cause, and what is causing their firing. So if you’re a neuroscientist,
  you do a study on 100 people and show them all 3 hours of great TV, recording
  neuronal activity the whole time. When you’re done, you can pick apart the
  funniest moments of each show (if we’re talking about comedy – if we’re
  talking drama, say the most exciting or deeply felt moments), identify what
  they’re doing to the brain, have a computer analyze the linguistic patterns in
  the dialogue, and – so here’s the really crazy part – *reverse engineer
  funniness*. So for these 100 people, you know (or your computer knows) how to
  write the empirically, scientifically funniest joke. And you can see where
  this is going: with computers, you’ll have such advanced linguistic processing
  that you can literally have computers write the dialogue of a show for you.
  Just, say, feed them a situation, a premise, a cast – and maybe you do this
  really precisely, into a database, or maybe computers will just be able to
  parse *your* speech – and then you have the computer write, or actually
  compute, an episode. In an instant. And it’s the funniest episode of this
  show, this theoretical show, anyone has ever seen. And then you can do this
  with your favorite shows. You take your favorite episodes, run a study on some
  people, watch their heads, and then in half an hour, you have a computer write
  a season or two of the show, where *every episode is as funny as the funniest
  episode.* This is for real – this is going to be nuts.”

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;“Wow, yeah, that’s pretty fucki-“

&nbsp;&nbsp;“And look, I already know what you’re going to say: ‘That’s cool, but that’s
  *just TV*. It’s just mindless entertainment. There’s no depth to it. It’s not
  art.’ Or whatever. But this is going to go beyond TV. If we’re talking about
  doing this with TV by monitoring brain responses of people watching TV, why
  not do the same thing with movies? And books? And I’m not just talking about
  comedies, or just about entertainment – I’m saying that you’ll be able to
  generate scripts for hundreds of *Citizen Kanes, Casablancas* – and, you know,
  with the movies, you’ll only generate a script, and it’ll be brilliant, but
  it’ll just be a script, but with books, I mean, shit, you’ll literally be able
  to generate hundreds of Dickens novels. Or Tolstoy, or Shakespeare, or
  whoever. And when I say something like you’ll have a computer writing hundreds
  of *Hamlets,* I’m not talking about hundreds of plays that are pretty much
  just rewrites of *Hamlet;* I’m talking about hundreds of plays with the same
  depth of feeling, the same linguistic complexity, and the same resulting
  catharsis, as *Hamlet.* And you’ll be able to mix it up – to say that this
  play is going to be equally influenced by *Hamlet* and *Macbeth* but it’s set
  in Mexico in the 1930s. Or maybe you like mix Shakespeare and Tennessee
  Williams, or, you know, you’ll be able to get really crazy, and mix like
  Thomas Pynchon and David Lynch and Dostoevsky. It’s literally fucking
  boundless, and with advances in computers, you’ll get it all in an instant.
  It’ll be like editing pictures in Photoshop or whatever.”
