---
layout: post
title:  "punk ads: acting like life is a big commercial"
date:   2015-03-23
categories: lecture
about: causation
---

 &nbsp;&nbsp; The past twenty years have seen many instances of punk music being used by advertisers. Often, it’s a bizarre spectacle to witness, as when Royal Caribbean Cruises used Iggy Pop’s “Lust for Life,” a song that is transparently about drug addiction, in several TV spots. Equally strange was when the Clash’s “London Calling,” with its anti-war, anti-nuclear, and (above all else) apocalyptic lyrics, was used to advertise the 2012 London Summer Olympics. Further examples abound, from the Sex Pistols’ “Pretty Vacant” appearing in a spot for a gambling website to Devo’s “Freedom of Choice” providing the score for a Miller Lite ad. Mysteriously, corporations seem to have developed a fondness for repackaging yesteryear’s challenges to the status quo as exhortations to consume. With so much other popular music to draw from, why do companies continually pull from a genre that is often characterized by its rebellious, anti-consumerist, and even anti-capitalist attitude?

 &nbsp;&nbsp; One answer is that this music has a particular kind of cultural resonance that other pop music cannot provide. That is, advertisers use this music precisely because it is edgy, because it challenges the status quo and raises concerns about the presumed mode of operation in Western society. Forty years ago, when the Cold War was in full swing and punk’s challenge to society was fresh, no one would ever have imagined punk music providing the soundtrack to an advertisement. But since then, punk has become an integral part of pop culture. Sometime after “Should I Stay Or Should I Go” went number one in the UK, after new wave became a transatlantic phenomenon, and after the rise of grunge in the nineties, punk rebelliousness began to be taken for granted as a part of the shared cultural psyche. We became desensitized to punk rebellion as it started to be repackaged and sold; and the rise of the quintessential corporate “punk” store, Hot Topic, proved that punk could be safely marketed as a commercially-sanctioned fashion statement. None of this is to say that punk became wholly apolitical and safe, and many bands continued to boldly criticize the political and social status quo. Instead, it is perhaps to say that as punk lost its subcultural status, it became cultural, a universally-acknowledged touchstone that provided a convenient symbol of rebelliousness.

 &nbsp;&nbsp; Importantly for advertisers, punk’s new status meant that, as a signifier of rebelliousness, it took on vague, quasi-mythological proportions that robbed the music of all political or other social content. A case in point is Miller’s use of Devo’s “Freedom of Choice” in a commercial that depicts a long, falling line of human dominoes leading to a man at a bar who steps out of the way to grab a Miller Lite he has just ordered. After this happens, a voice tells us that, “At Miller, we brew great tasting beer, because you can get in line and take what they give you, or make your own choice.” By effectively sound-biting the song so that the only noticeable line in the song is the simple phrase “freedom of choice,” Miller excises the song’s real message, which, while imprecise, raises questions about democracy, consumerism, and fate of civilization. Miller is thus able to transform an ethos of genuine social and political dissent into a rebellion against an unspecific light beer status quo. In this commercial and many others, the punk drive to “be different” in the sense of making a meaningful challenge to social and political norms becomes an exhortation to “be different” by choosing one product over another. In these settings, advertisers attempt to use punk music to imbue consumers with a false sense of agency that gives them the satisfaction of being individuals who aren’t afraid to go against the grain. Choosing one light beer over another bears absolutely no resemblance to genuine rebellion, but drawing the analogy and blurring the contours of its source does just enough to make consumers *feel* like mavericks who are making a statement.

 &nbsp;&nbsp; Of course, this appropriation is not unilateral, and this trend in advertising has allowed several bands to reap financial rewards that they once appeared to disdain. But in receiving what seem to be long overdue profits, these musicians are submitting to the culture of blind, seemingly apolitical consumerism they made a vocation of speaking out against. Not only did Devo license their music to Miller, but they rerecorded the song for the ad – for the purpose of getting more royalties – as is their policy for all ads, which has led in another instance to Mark Mothersbaugh telling consumers, “When you got a dirty floor, use a Swiffer!” In a commercial for Country Life Butter, former Sex Pistol John Lydon (better known as “Johnny Rotten”) tells viewers that he doesn’t buy Country Life because it’s “British” – poking fun at the political irreverence the Pistols were famous for – but rather because it’s “the best.” Mothersbaugh and Lydon, we can be sure, appreciate the irony of what they’re doing, but the transformation of their symbols of rebellion into instruments of submission must leave all but the most cynical dumbfounded. Or perhaps they’ve simply inured themselves to the reality Mothersbaugh sang of 35 years ago: “freedom of choice is what you got / freedom from choice is what you want.” Mothersbaugh and Lydon, both multimillionaires, have hung around to tell us just how sweet liberation is.
