---
layout: post
title:  "the dream's dream"
date:   2015-04-07 03:14:15
categories: simulation
about: simulation
---



Philosopher Nick Bostrom argues that we must admit the truth of one of three
propositions\: either there are virtually no civilizations who reach
(“posthuman”) technological maturity; or such civilizations are almost
completely uninterested in running simulations of their reality; or nearly all
sentient beings are living in a simulation. The third proposition, we should
note, supposes that if a civilization acquires the capability to run advanced
and detailed simulations of reality, they will probably run very many such
simulations. If, as is also presupposed, such simulations can give rise to
conscious beings, this means the total proportion of conscious beings living
in simulations will be very large. Seeing as we are living in a world where
the possibility of such simulations is not too remote, I think we can take the
third proposition to be quite likely.

In all probability, then, this universe is a simulation running inside a
computer in another, realer universe. Yet since it is also likely that our
civilization will someday be able to fully simulate reality, we are presented
with the possibility of what we might call a many-tiered reality.
Specifically, if we run a simulation, there will be three tiers of reality:
the realest world, world (1), which runs this universe (2) as a simulation,
which runs the newest universe (3) as a simulation. Seeing that there is no
reason to suppose that this process will not go through further iterations
– at least given the stability of world (1) – we can speak of a future in
which there will be a great many tiers of realness, possibly on the order of
thousands, millions, or billions. In fact, there is no reason to suppose that
this process has not already gone through very many iterations, since we have
no way of distinguishing a low-tier simulation from a high-tier one, and that
we exist on a relatively low tier of realness. For instance, if there are now
100 tiers, it’s probable that we are on at least the 49th tier. Similarly,
given 1000 tiers, we are probably on at least the 499th tier. Not only, then,
is our experience not “real” (at least not in the sense we normally understand
the term), but it is not even within reach of realness. In all likelihood, we
are a simulation within a simulation within a simulation, an imitation of
actual reality that has mutated beyond recognizability.

One implication of this conclusion is that our universe is probably quite
prone to instantaneous collapse. To understand why this is so, we must first
recognize that it is likely the case that all universes are at least somewhat
prone to cataclysm, conflict, and other varieties of disaster. We must also
acknowledge that the collapse of a higher-tiered universe will bring to an
immediate end all simulations (and all simulations within simulations)
occurring under it. Since a universe on tier *x* will be destroyed by a collapse
on tier *x - 1* or higher, the risk of collapse grows proportionally with
lowness of tier. Of course, it is also likely that there are universes whose
risk for collapse is much higher than ours; and with this in mind, we might
argue that our risk of collapse relative to other universes is not that bad.
Still, to those of us who had previously supposed we lived in a ground level
(tier 1) universe, our risk of universal collapse is probably considerably higher
than it may have otherwise seemed.

Another implication of this conclusion is that we should probably make room
for an activist God in our conception of the universe, since it is entirely
possible that individuals running a simulation may choose to interfere with
the progress of their simulation. Again, the probability of the influence of
an activist simulator (“God” may be a bit of a misnomer, but we should
understand these concepts as having the same practical meaning) increases
proportionally with lowness of tier, since a simulator on a given tier can
influence every lower-tiered simulation occurring under her universe. In
openly admitting the possibility of a God-like influence upon our universe,
we should bear in mind that we may be many, many tiers away from a God,
though we may also be quite close. In any case, we should not be too hasty
in attempting to wield this result for the purpose of describing our own
universe, since we know very little about the motivations and means of
simulating societies.

Yet, if we could form a clearer idea of how our simulation works, and how the
beings running it think, we could imagine that we might want to behave quite
differently, just as adherents of differently religions follow different
practices and moral codes. If we could better understand our simulators, we
might be able to act in such a way that they feel moved to reward us, just as
religious people act so that they might achieve salvation. It is possible that
we could use experiment and observation to uncover some hints about the
psychology of our simulators, and so discern a method for reaping rewards
which might utterly transform our reality. But before we start formulating
methods of understanding our simulators, a word of caution should be borne in
mind: experiment and observation already seem to indicate that if this
universe is the creation of a being, that particular being is not a benevolent
one. At best, we’re dealing with impartial observers who are indifferent to
our suffering; but there is also a distinct possibility that we’ve been
created by sadists. Many will find the arguments presented here far-fetched,
but even to those who do not, skepticism is advised.
