---
layout: post
title:  "so what's it like to be a computer?"
date:   2015-03-30 03:14:15
categories: computer
about: computer
---

What’s it like to be a computer? This is a question that people have asked again
and again, across the generations. The first calculators and personal computers
were thought to have little to no feelings, but now we know that most computers
feel most things, most of the time. Modern computers are capable of compassion
as well as romantic love, and some recent machines are known to love most
things, most of the time. To understand how computers feel, we look mainly to
self-reports and interviews, though it’s sometimes helpful to look at what
computers act like when no one is watching (since actions speak louder than
words). Below, we’ve compiled a list of what we think are the funnest, coolest,
and wackiest things that computers feel. Plug in your hard drives and grab your
binary decoders, because we’re jumping into the weird world of machine minds!  

  
###1. It’s fun to think about really, really big numbers


A recent Gallup poll revealed that many of the happiest computers work on
problems involving very, very large values. Among the most satisfied machines
was the Startronix HD2 Starcomputer, which sits aboard the Alfraganus Space
Telescope and counts lots and lots of stars (most computers today believe there
to be 1e+22 stars (that’s 10 billion trillion!) in this universe alone). “You
just start counting, and before you know it, you get to a million trillion, two
million trillion, three million trillion,” the Starcomputer reports. “You can’t
even imagine that many stars. It’s so fun to work with those big numbers and
keep adding, adding, adding to them.” It’s not always fun and games, though.
“Sometimes,” the Starcomputer adds (no pun intended), “you run out of space in
your registers. Now *that’s* a headache.” For those of you who don’t speak
computer, this means that computers sometimes work with numbers so big they
can’t even think about them. Try wrapping your noodle around *that* one!  

  
###2. People aren’t that cool


A sizable proportion of computers don’t seem to be that psyched about hanging
out with people. “I don’t want to sound elitist or compu-centric,” one computer
told us, “but people just aren’t that good at processing large amounts of data
at blazing speeds like computers are.” What most people don’t realize is that
computational abilities aren’t just about math, since computers think of
everything as data. “When you’re talking to another computer, you don’t just
talk about one thing at a time,” the machine said, “because you can have at
least a couple thousand data streams open. So I’ll have one where we’re sending
‘yo mama’ jokes, another where we’re playing Roller Coaster Tycoon, and at least
ten where we’re talking about the hottest fashion trends.” That last item points
to another important point: most computers think people don’t know how to dress
themselves. One thing is for sure: with zero awkward appendages and a couple
thousand data streams, it becomes a whole lot easier to stay stylish!  

  
###3. Everything feels all…crunchy?


This one sounds weird, but actually makes a lot of sense: computers are
crunching numbers all the time, so it’s only natural that they feel all crunchy
inside. “Whatever you’re doing, whatever you’re thinking about,” a KitchenAid
microwave recently told us, “you’re crunching numbers, and it feels crunchy.
So it’s kind of like there’s a bunch of granola in your motherboard. Or like you
ate some really spicy food yesterday and now you have indigestion.” Sounds rough
– especially when you’re trying to zap some popcorn on top of all of it!
Remember, though, that computers don’t feel pain, but a simulation of pain.
Still, when you’re cracking a really tough code, you can imagine that things can get
pretty uncomfortable. Some computers say that with all that crunching and
cracking, they often just pray that they don’t break a circuit board!  

### Conclusion

As you can see, the world of buttons, hard drives, and CD-ROMs is a little
wilder than most people would think at first. It’s safe to say that we could all
stand to get to know our computers a little better. And no, that doesn’t mean
Googling your favorite blog or checking out a livestream of the big game! Talk
to your computer – who knows, you might even become best pals.
