---
layout: post
title:  "thoughts on nationality"
date:   2016-08-01
categories: blog
about: "nationality"
---


&nbsp;&nbsp; I recently had the strange experience of witnessing a Syrian-born immigrant (man) to Germany and a German woman argue about whether the man was, as he claimed, German. The man explained that he had German citizenship, had been living in Germany for a number of years, and could speak fluent German. The German woman responded with a puzzled look, and pressed him. He spoke some German and explained that he wrote his undergraduate thesis in German. But she was still confused — and maybe a little annoyed, too. “Where were you born?” she wanted to know. The man calmly explained that he was born in Syria, but emphasized that he had been living in Germany for some time. When she tried to keep questioning him, my discomfort got the best of me, and I intervened to change the topic of conversation.

&nbsp;&nbsp; Watching this exchange led me to a number of questions, chief among which was the question of how national belonging works. There are some obvious sufficient conditions for belonging, like being born somewhere, speaking a national language, or participating in the country's culture. But none of these seem to be necessary. For instance, many American children are born overseas, on military bases. Some are born in other countries to non-American parents, but come over early enough to easily become American. Other Americans are born and live here, but in ethnic enclaves that isolate them from the country's language and culture. All of these people, it seems to me, are obviously Americans, at least in the sense that I would use the word on a day-to-day basis.

&nbsp;&nbsp; But what about people who adopt another country as their own? In my case, I could conceivably decide to stay in Germany, master the language, and adopt the culture (I even look German, since half my family has a distant Austrian background). But would I ever really be German, or just American-German (are hyphenated identities exclusive of their individual constituents)? Napoleon was born in Corsica just a few years after France annexed the island, didn't speak French until he was university-age, and was, for a time, a Corsican nationalist. But surely Napoleon was French, even in the unhyphenated sense?

&nbsp;&nbsp; On a more mundane level, I could ask the same sorts of questions about my belonging to the metropole of my youth. I grew up in Northwest Indiana, 30 minutes from Chicago, and moved to Chicago when I graduated from college and lived there for two years. Am I a Chicagoan? My family's background on both sides goes back to the city, and I've spent most of my life having strong cultural ties to it, as well as being within physical proximity. Still, if you asked me, I'd have to say I'm not really a Chicagoan. I didn't actually grow up in the city, I've only spent a couple years there, and my speech only has some minor features of the Chicago accent. (I'm also quite sure that most Chicagoans wouldn't consider me to be among them.)

&nbsp;&nbsp; On the one hand, I realize that this all seems sort of pointless: who cares if I'm really “from” Chicago? But on the other, it's tremendously important: nationalism is one of the most animating forces of recent history, and in addition to being foundational to the modern state, it's played a prominent role in some of the darkest episodes of our past. It's also, of course, playing a huge role right now in all sorts of issues related to migration and borders. How we answer the question of belonging is directly related to how we evaluate the European right's anxieties about Islamic culture, or the British rights anxieties about the influx of Poles.

&nbsp;&nbsp; Besides this, it goes without saying that many of us find these questions to be of great personal importance. The Syrian man I mentioned later expressed to me his dismay and indignance at having to defend his claim to Germanness. And unlike the question of whether I'm a Chicagoan, there are serious consequences for what he calls himself, especially with last year's admission of around a million migrants into Germany and a contemporaneous surge in the anti-immigrant right. There are compelling reasons to want to abandon being Syrian in favor of being German, and it's clear that the government is making real efforts to integrate migrants here into German culture. But once you learn the language, acquire citizenship, graduate from university, and find a job, will you be allowed to call yourself German?
