---
layout: post
title:  "lifetime piling up"
date:   2016-07-08 03:14:15
categories: blog
about: "big data"
---


&nbsp;&nbsp; Today, we are all storing relatively complete pictures of our lives online. We bank, shop, consume media, and socialize online, with many spending a substantial portion of their lives directly using or otherwise relying on the internet. In contrast to the paper trails of the past, the information associated with each of these transactions remains permanently available in the cloud by default. As long as I don't explicitly tell Facebook to delete my chat logs (is this even possible?), I'll be able to look at them 30 years on from now—and the same goes for my Netflix history, Google searches, cloud email and so on.

 &nbsp;&nbsp; Given that information we're storing covers in detail many of the most important aspects of our lives, we can learn a lot about someone from this accumulated data. Should we gain unlimited access to the information an individual has stored online, we can quickly discover who their friends are, what their interests are, what their financial history is, where they live—everything we need, in short, to build a detailed profile of the person and/or steal their identity. In some cases, we might even have enough to write a biography, with this level of detail becoming more common as we store more and more information online.

  &nbsp;&nbsp; 	The theoretical availability of this volume of data on a personal scale is unprecedented. Of course, for centuries, we've had elaborate systems for creating, storing, retrieving and modifying information. But today, better versions of these systems are widely and affordably available to consumers in the developed world. For reference, a quick estimate suggests the information in Library of Alexandria could be encoded with roughly 1.5 terabytes of data. In comparison, I can buy a 2 terabyte external hard drive for around $90, which my computer will index so that I can hunt down the file I'm looking for at a speed no ancient librarian could possibly rival.

 &nbsp;&nbsp; We're entering a situation, then, where everyone is increasingly able and even incentivized to store on corporate servers a volume of data that once sufficed to chart the bounds of human knowledge. Because of this, we're facing the amazing and terrifying prospect of having the opportunity to learn about ourselves more than ever before. It's amazing, for instance, to be able to use the new tools we're developing to mine data about our lives to make them better. This initiative can come from users, like participants in the “quantified self” movement who advocate everything from self-tracking of finances to use of biometric tools for the purposes of greater self-knowledge and better living. It can also come from services, like Netflix and Spotify, that take user data and use it to provide a better service to users (in this case, I'm thinking of using user history to generate recommendations). We can only expect that these sorts of services and efforts will only get more powerful and sophisticated as computing power and volume of user data grows, opening up the potential for possibilities like cheap, data-driven preventative medicine and applications that automatically adapt to user personality and preference without direct input.

 &nbsp;&nbsp; We also have the opportunity to learn more about others. In one sense, this is wonderful. Certainly, additional data about behavior will be immensely useful for psychologists, economists, and other social scientists, as well as for future historians digging through the incidental archives we're all currently creating. If we are able to find an approach to this kind of research that respects users' privacy while being transparent and constructive, this could present new frontiers in our understanding of humans, our relationships and society. On the collective scale as well as the individual, we'll be able to understand ourselves better than ever before.

 &nbsp;&nbsp; But it's worth wondering whether we will get this right, especially given the situation we have now. Currently, both corporations and states have access to enormous amounts of our data, and most of us don't even fully understand what exactly they have and what they can do with it. Part of the reason for this is that we face the fact of nontransparent dragnet surveillance programs that, despite the revelations of recent years, are still full of secrets. Another part is that most of us (myself included) don't understand what rights we're giving to corporations regarding our data most of the time, which is at least partly explained by the fact that we don't have such a big cultural emphasis on our right to privacy. The result is an ever more dangerous powder keg, with serious abuses becoming increasingly possible as we accumulate more data without developing a collective understanding about the power of data.

 &nbsp;&nbsp; Hopefully, the fact that are lives are becoming increasingly digital will bring about a new and improved understanding of the role of information in society. But this is not inevitable, and we'll do well to remember the novelty and scale of what's happening right now. We've never seen anything like the deluge of data we're facing right now. If we handle it well, we stand so much to gain from it; but if we handle it poorly, there's so much to lose.

