---
layout: post
title:  "fantasy politics"
date:   2016-08-05
categories: blog
about: "games"
---

> When I'm driving, I sometimes turn on the radio and I find very often that what I'm listening to is a discussion of sports. These are telephone conversations. People call in and have long and intricate discussions, and it's plain that quite a high degree of thought and analysis is going into that. People know a tremendous amount. They know all sorts of complicated details and enter into far-reaching discussion about whether the coach made the right decision yesterday and so on. These are ordinary people, not professionals, who are applying their intelligence and analytic skills in these areas and accumulating quite a lot of knowledge and, for all I know, understanding. On the other hand, when I hear people talk about, say, international affairs or domestic problems, it's at a level of superficiality that's beyond belief.

&nbsp;&nbsp; In this interview and in general, Noam Chomsky seems to be suggesting that if people were organized to assert political power, politics would be more directly relevant and thus interesting. With this additional draw, politics could come to occupy the role that sports does for many today, and bring out the analytical skills people use when they place bets or call in to sports radio. This makes sense to me, and I'm definitely in favor of the democratization of our political processes to make them more inclusive and engaging. But the analogy of politics and sports is also striking in itself. Until we have more influence, is there a way for us to “play along” with electoral politics to develop our understanding (and have fun)?

&nbsp;&nbsp; When I think of “playing along” in the context of sports, I immediately think of fantasy football. Not only is this a game in itself with its own internal rules, but it also really demands attention to the happenings of professional football. At the same time that it gives players/virtual owners a diversion, it draws them into the real game and deepens their knowledge and appreciation. To be competitive, players need to follow games, look at stats, consider trades, and follow sports news. The best players are constantly absorbing, analyzing, and interpreting information to try to maximize their performance. They know the real-life game inside and out, much like pundits know politics inside and out.

&nbsp;&nbsp; As it turns out, there are already several efforts at developing “fantasy politics.” “FANschool” offers three games: one where players predict state-level outcomes in a presidential election, and two others where players try to predict how often state actors will be in the news. “Fantasy Congress,” on the other hand, seems to more closely capture the team dynamic of fantasy football: players draft Congresspeople and Senators, and score points based on their legislative activity.

&nbsp;&nbsp; It seems like these games all command skills similar to fantasy football, and I'm sure one could learn a lot by playing them. But I also have a political problem with their premises: they're value-neutral. That is, they are solely about predicting outcomes, and not at all about expressing values or building a critique. I suppose that players will probably inadvertently become more critical about political decisions by playing these games, but first and foremost, they'll be trying to predict outcomes. And when this gets down to the level of electoral outcomes, it seems like a lot of the skills one needs to cultivate lie on the more boring side of punditry. I, for one, can only stand a limited amount of pontification about how a candidate could win over voters in a certain state. I don't think developing these skills would be actively harmful, but it is quite clear to me that trying to decide if Ohio will go blue or red is not nearly as important or interesting as trying to determine whether the US should be participating in the conflict in Syria.

&nbsp;&nbsp; Perhaps understanding the issues would actually be served quite well by one of the games about predicting who will be in the news (I haven't played these yet, but am considering putting together a group of folks to check it out). But picking out countries or US states for my roster doesn't seem as satisfying as building a team in the way one does for fantasy football, which is somehow more tangible and meaningful. In politics, though, the goals/points would need to be something other than pieces of legislation passed or number of TV interviews given. I wouldn't want my team to feature, for instance, the Senator who's sponsored the largest number of bills to become law: this is, namely, Orrin Hatch (R-Utah), who once said, “I wouldn't want to see homosexuals teaching school anymore than I'd want to see members of the American Nazi Party teaching school.”

&nbsp;&nbsp; How, then, can we make our values a part of a game about politics? One encouraging example is model parliaments on Reddit. These are essentially simulations of real-life parliaments, featuring model parties adapted from real-life parties, as well as new parties developed in the context of each respective virtual national parliament. These model parties develop their own manifestos, with some independence of the lines of their real-life counterparts, and then try to enact a legislative agenda. I find three particular factors of play here very interesting: developing and articulating political values, following and responding to real-life issues, and trying to act on principles within the constraints of a democracy. This combination, combined with regular discussion and debate with other players, means that participants are required to engage critically with political issues and try to develop their own viewpoints.

&nbsp;&nbsp; Can we somehow bridge the gap between the two approaches, one of which concerns itself with predicting real-life outcomes, the other, with creating a virtual alternative? Perhaps one could use predicting the news as a sort of minigame within a model parliament. Or perhaps a model parliament could somehow integrate real-life legislators who affect the outcome of the game. Or perhaps I could, you know, actually go out and organize. But then it wouldn't be a game anymore!
